
  # Minutes of Meetings

### (Next) Online Meeting on 27.03.2023 at 15:30 

### Online Meeting on 07.03.2023 at 15:30 
### Participants: Daniel Morais, Kim Praebel, Owen Wangensteen, Chloe Figueroa, Chris Bowler, Dan Lear, Domenico D'Alelio SZN, Isabelle Rombouts, Iveta Matejusova, Michael Cunliffe, Pascal Hablutzel, Saara Suominen

---

**Kim**
Greets and thanks the participants that were able to join the meeting. Explains the exit of Owen and thanks him for still being able to help and give guidance. Introduces the WP2 online meeting for organization of the work before the in person kick-off meeting in Paris. He won't be able to join because of a teaching expedition with students. Calls for a round of introductions and announces that Daniel will take the lead on the WP2 as he got extra teaching duties. Asks Daniel to conduct the meeting and share his presentation. 

**Daniel**
Thanks everyone for the trust and promises putting efforts to keep up with the high profile of the group.  

Show presentation: 
https://github.com/bioinfo-arctic/MARCO-BOLO-WP2/blob/285f4b5236290338f15712179d8fdc0b153f5369/MARCO-BOLO%20WP2%20second%20online%20meeting%20slides.pdf  

Cites his temporary github page to allocate meeting and WP resources, so everyone has access to them, until the MARCO-BOLO (MBO) project manager creates a definitive cloud storage for all these resources.  
Suggest to keep an eye on the big picture which is to link the capabilities of European coastal and marine observation capabilities to the global efforts to understand and restore ocean health.  
Gives suggestions to people responsible for deliverables too look into other deliverables and identify overlapping tasks, so work won't be redundant and more can be achieved.  
Mentions his worries about the lack of specificities in the project description and urges us to create objective an specific deadlines to be presented in Paris. Demonstrating how the task will be done and when will it be delivered, all of this, aligned to the Deliverables and the Tasks described in the project. 

**Dan Lear**
Mentions also the overlap between different WPs. And stresses the caution on creating multiple repositories as the temporary GitHub.  
Suggests to use ongoing and successful projects as OBIS and GBIF as sources of standards to use on MBO.  

**Owen**
Asks who will be in Paris. 
(Dan, Chris, Saara, Michael, Iveta, Daniel, Domenico... not sure if all of these or only these, sorry )  
**Iveta**  
Opens up a discussion about the Deliverable 2.1 (D. 2.1). Having to make a decision about the scope regarding the meta-analyses of technical and practical aspects of eDNA approaches. Shold it be more broad on environments and methods or more specific to marine and coastal methods? Also how many methods should be compared?  

**Owen**
Advises to narrow it to most used methods and reminds about problems regarding data sharing and suggests to seek for what methods actually have available data.  
Focus on protocols, reviews and approaches that have good data sharing policies and actual data available, so we can use it in our assessment and report construction.  
Brings attention to databases and procedures that follow the FAIR principles of data sharing.  

**Domenico**
Points out that there are 2 ways to make data available:
RawSequences > Useful for scientists and bioinformatcs processing
Tax Tables > Useful for policy makers

Explore which of those would be more useful, taking for instance the amount of citations each would have.

**Owen**
Current important problem of publications lacking information about the pipeline used, taxonomic annotation missing the quality information of such annotations. Even taxonomic studies that don't even mention the marker used to conduct the study.

**Iveta**
Agrees on driving more efforts on the data analyses part than on the experimental part.

**Mike**
Brings up the title "Ultimate handbook of observation..." shown as a deliverable of WP7 and starting a discussion about what will be this book based on and the interdependence of WPs.

**Kim and Mike**
Discuss the use of long term fish data from fish farms eDNA data

**Kim**
Suggest the use of the Danish aquarium dataset as an effort for creating a Mock community.

**Saara**
Rises the concern of having a tool/webserver able to compare the outcome of multiple pipelines on a single mock community.

**Owen**
Recommends using multiple datasets insead of a single mock community, having variation on taxonomic composition and variable relative abundance of groups.
Important to use mock communities with morfological/classical observation information as a way of proofing the congruence of the chosen dataset/method

**Daniel**
Mentions the Mockrobiota initiative to generate mock communities, using isolated DNA from specific groups of organisms.

**Iveta and Chris** 
Discuss the focus on coastal and marine data instead of including also freshwater, plus the need of using sediments and soil on top of the marine data.

**Owen**
Points out that DNAaquanet has already created freshwater resources

**Kim**
Tells about his knowledge about OBAMA-NEXT and their approach to eDNA and efforts on fresh water 
Tells also about EMO-BON being a part of MARCO-BOLO for generating data and giving access to sampling information

**Iveta**
Recommends the creation of a spreadsheet to see the data we have

**Mike** 
Tells about the focus of EMO-BON on molecular data, but having a sub-sampling site that also collects data using classical observations

**Daniel**
Closes up the meeting reminding people about our recurrent online meeting the last monday of the month at 14:00 and asks everyone to create a small presentation with their view on what are the specific plans for achieving the task proposed in the project.



### Online Meeting on 24.02.2023 at 14:00 
### Participants: Daniel Morais, Kim Praebel, Pascal Hablützel, Saara Suominen 

---

**Kim** 
> Include Pascal Hablützel (pascal.hablutzel@vliz.be) in the email list. (Won't be in the Paris Meeting) 
> Ring test in Genes projects... to compare pipelines – Sangamberk   

**Saara**
> Sarah asking about the samples she receive today if they belong to "MAPS" 
Sequencing platform NovaSeq 6000 – PCR free library prep. 
She would like to be able to compare different pipelines 
Use of a Standard dataset (Mock Community) 
Make a comparison website to show how different pipelines influence the results 
R pacman pipeline – Example of different tools to perform the tasks

**Kim**
> What should be our angle during the meeting in Paris. Should we meet and discuss deliverables? 
Need for reorganization after the leaving of Owen and Lucie  

**Pascal**
> Start on pipeline comparison  

**Kim**
> Agreed, focus on what should be on the initial page.  
What is the data format that should be distributed?  
What sort of data? OTU table, Graphs ... 

**Saara**
> Should we give them a workflow or just pipeline recommendations? 

**Pascal**
> If we offer a species list, it will be straight forward. 
Taxonomic assignment is tricky, so should we give guidelines to include further information in the taxonomical lists. Further information as if the species has ever been seen there or if it makes sense to see these species there 

**Kim**
> The database we use is based on the species we always have here. We could upload our sequences to the database and track them, irrespective of the taxonomic annotation.  

**Saara**
> We should make an action plan based on deliverables   

**Pascal**
> Problems regarding the fulfillment of the task for inferring functions, as marked in task 2.3 from the WP2. 

**Daniel**
> Attribution of ecological roles instead of functions... 

**Kim**
>Focus on the higher and general deliverables 
We will make slides focusing on those for the next meeting (07.03) 
Challenges to surpass after the main authors of the WP are not the leaders anymore.  

>How are we going to approach the work to be done? 
Suggestion to keep regular meetings (all agree on monthly basis meetings) 
Helpful to keep momentum and present results.  
Mondays at 14:00 (agreed by all) 

Next meeting to present a more concrete plan of action with the focus on the big picture. 

---

### Actions:
- [ ] Get the Marco-Bolo google docs.  
- [x] Pascal Hablützel (pascal.hablutzel@vliz.be) in the email list

> Link to google drive when preparing documents for project submission
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1f-5FJHL_ig8LTIG11BB0BG2cIVwG-QFV 

- [ ] Get current google drive link from Davide 

 
> Link to spreadsheet with project managing information
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1HTUCFlYoiKLiwXmdZorN7CKSqNIhP_wS9uGdjmMqSbE/edit#gid=1667877896 

---
